# Programs and Complex Forms

## The Elements of a Program

### Category

Every Program or Complex Form fits into a Category. This category doesn't simply
change which Paragons provide a bonus to characters using them, but to which
skill is actually linked with activating the Program in the first place. Many
programs are resisted in one manner or another, and they will describe the
resistance dice pool within their description. Many programs also have an
"optimized defense" available, and if the target *has* that defense, 2 hits of
the user are canceled before resistance dice are even contemplated.

* **Analysis Programs:** Analysis Programs gather and discriminate information
  from the Matrix. Based off of the Data Search skill, these programs are most
  closely analogous to Detection Spells.
* **Attack Programs:** Attack Programs interfere with computing procedures,
  whether performed by machines or the metahuman brain. Based off of the
  Cybercombat skill, these programs are most closely analogous to Combat Spells.
* **Background Programs:** Background Programs adjust perceptions of the Matrix.
  Whether they create virtual sensation or create an interactive game world,
  they take up trivial amounts of memory and do not count as a running program
  for any purpose. Any perception affecting programming that is capable of
  actually overwhelming another user's reality preferences is a Communication
  Program, not a Background Program. Background Programming requires no roll or
  skill to create or maintain (though playing games and whatnot may involve
  skill checks if for some reason it is important to determine how well a
  character's gaming has gone during a session).
* **Communications Programs:** Communications Programs affect encryption and
  signal transmission in the Matrix. Based off the Electronic Warfare skill,
  these programs are most close analogous to Illusion Spells.
* **Exploit Programs:** Exploit Programs mimic instructions in devices and
  networks. Based off the Hacking skill, these programs are most closely
  analogous to Manipulation Spells, most specifically control manipulations.
* **Operations Programs:** Operations Programs make systems do what they are
  "supposed" to do. Based off the Computer skill, these programs are most
  closely analogous to Health Spells, though most of the memory hogging
  programming that the 6th world has filled its servers with, whether it's
  crunching numbers on projected soda demands or masterminding a world conquest
  scheme, are also Operations Programs.
* **Intrusion Countermeasure Programs:** Distinct from other programming, an IC
  Program doesn't use the skills of a computer operator at all. It is a program
  which actually runs other programs, without a human brain's directions. The IC
  can use its own rating as a dicepool to use any program, but can only run
  those programs on its own system or over an established Connection. IC cannot
  initiate a Connection on its own, and takes no more than 1 IP per round
  regardless of the network it's on. It does act very quickly though, rolling
  2\*Rating + Response for Initiative.
  * Note that the existence of IC is inherently dangerous to the stability and
    even existence of the world. Should it ever be able to seriously threaten a
    Hacker in terms of mobility and effect, we're in Skynet or *Dreams of Flesh
    and Sand* territory where the human race has perhaps become a pale vestige
    attached to a planet dominated by instantly self replicating machine
    overlords - so gamemasters are well advised to take a good hard look at
    anything that they allow IC to do under any circumstances.
* **Pilots / Autosofts / Skillsofts:** Perhaps the most powerful of programming
  are the ones which replicate skills. There is no "Longarms" program. There
  are, however, a number of programs which when confronted with specific
  hardware and a decently massive pile of processing to fall back on can
  successfully fire a shotgun. Skillsofts work because there is a Skillwire
  system in place to slave the human brain into acting as the reserve computer
  that such a massive program would need. Also, it's metahuman specific, a whole
  new Skillsoft would have to be devised for a naga or a hellhound, even if they
  did have a skillwire system produced for them. Similarly, a Pilot program is
  not generic. It's specific to a specific device. You can't just grab a 1000Â¥
  drone and copy its pilot into your car - the drone doesn't have to handle the
  high speeds that the passenger vehicle does and its programming simply
  wouldn't be appropriate to the other machine. Autosofts, similarly are device
  specific. That doesn't necessarily mean that you need hundreds of different
  versions of every Autosoft. After all, the Clearsight soft is specific to
  *cameras* not to one or another kind of drone - so it can actually be reused
  on many different drones so long as they are all picking up camera data on the
  same frequencies.
* **Decompiling Forms:** Decompiling Forms are only available to users of
  Resonance. They remove things from the Matrix. This is exceedingly different
  from corrupting data or creating alternative truths of higher seeming
  veracity, and use of these forms upsets a lot of people.
* **Registering Forms:** Registering Forms are only available to users of
  Resonance and change the way icons interact with the Matrix. They are
  therefore more similar to things which might be accomplished with Software or
  Hardware tests.
* **MacGuffin Programming:** There are lots of programs which do large and
  processing intensive actions. They synthesize skill softs, they predict the
  weather, they control nanite fabrication. These programs are often measured in
  "Man Years" to completion and they take a truly staggering amount of
  computational power to run to completion. There is no purpose served in having
  specific rules for these programs and so we don't.

### Type

Biofeedback programs directly affect metahuman brains, Data programs affect
machines. Programming is labeled with a B or a D to distinguish its type. An
orphan brain can only be affected by type B procedures, an empty network or lone
device can only be affected by D programming. If a program can be used on
either, it will be labeled with both a B and a D.

A non-metahuman brain always is considered to have an optimized defense against
any B type program that was not specifically written for the type of creature
that it is. You cannot use hacking on the fly or threading to bypass that
particular problem without very specialized skills and talents. So, for example,
a character who was attempting to use seize on a dragon or a shapeshifter would
have their first two hits canceled automatically simply due to the alien
neurophysiology. Ghouls are considered metahumans for this purpose.

### Range

#### Decrypting a Signal?

Due to the distributed nature of data storage and transmission, and the direct
induction method employed by many major hacking operations, decrypting a
device's signal is generally not required to hack a connection to it. Devices
can be suborned and added to a hacker's network without the hacker ever knowing
or caring what information had previously been passed through it.

#### Line of Sight (LOS)

Many programs can only be used with very precise targeting. Causing a specific
transformation in the data of a hard drive is not simply a matter of sending out
a broadcast of a long series of waves that will miraculously effect a change in
one device and not in any other. It's way more complicated than that and
actually not even doable with pre-2029 technology. It involves making a
precision electrical effect at a specific point in space. It's probably quantum
or something. The point is, if a range is followed by (LOS), then your signal
producing device actually has to be able to draw a clear line to the point in
space that the target is physically present at, as well as knowing where that
target is. The math involved is hellacious of course, but fortunately you've got
really powerful computers and they are all harnessed together and able to draw
upon the power of a human brain.

#### Signal

Programming with a Signal range can be used if the target is within the range of
projectable high density signal of the actor's network. Signal range is
abbreviated "S" in programming descriptions.

#### Listening

Programming with a Listening range can be used if the actor's network is within
the range of projected high density signal of the *target*. Remember that using
a high grade Receiver can increase the range at which a signal can be received,
precisely as if the original signal had been projected at a higher Signal rating
in the first place. An unmodified human has a high density signal rating of 0,
meaning that an orphan brain needs to be very close to the acting device in
order for Listening programs to function if such Receiver units are not used.
Listening range is abbreviated "L" in programming descriptions.

#### Handshake

Programming with a Handshake range can only be used if the target is within the
range of high density signal of the actor's network *and* the actor is within
the high density signal range of the target's network. In short, if the
requirements for both Signal and Listening range are met, the conditions for
Handshake range are met as well. If both the target and the actor have an open
connection to a third party's node they are within Handshake range of each other
regardless of distance in the real world. Handshake range is abbreviated "H" in
programming descriptions.

#### Connection

Programming with a Connection range can only be used if the actor has an open
account on the target or vice versa. Connection range is abbreviated "C" in
programming descriptions.

#### Matrix

Programming with a Matrix range can be used so long as the actor has a
connection to the Matrix at large. Matrix range is abbreviated "M" in
programming descriptions.

### Time

Not all programs take the same amount of time to use. Most take Complex Actions:
"CA", but some take Simple Actions: "SA" or extended periods of time to be
properly used.

### Duration

Some programs are Instant (I): They run, complete, and then you're done.

Some programs are Sustained (S): They maintain activity for more than an
instantaneous moment of extreme code use. A network can sustain a number of
running procedures equal to its System rating before experiencing slow-down.
Every additional sustained program reduces all Matrix dicepools of the network
by 2 dice. If a system is called upon to run a number of sustained programs
beyond its system rating equal to the Logic of the metahuman brain running it,
the entire network crashes.

Some programming is Permanent (P): The program affects a real change onto the
Matrix which will persist after the network which spawned it stops dedicating
processing cycles to it. These programs must be sustained for 15 combat rounds,
after which they no longer require or benefit from input the originating
network. Hits on the originating success test can be dedicated to reducing the
required sustaining time rather than to increasing the effect of the action.
Every hit used to speed the process reduces the required sustaining time by 3
rounds.

## Analysis Programs

Using an Analysis program requires a Logic + Data Search test.

### Backtrack

* **Type:** D
* **Range:** C
* **Time:** SA
* **Duration:** P
* **Optimized Defense:** Satellite Routing

This program targets the Matrix Stealth value of the Network that you are
attempting to Backtrack (minimum threshold of 1). If successful, the real world
location of the target Network is computed to within 1 meter as soon as the
program becomes Permanent.

### Brain Scan

* **Type:** B
* **Range:** L (LOS)
* **Time:** CA
* **Duration:** P
* **Resistance Roll:** Willpower + Firewall

The contents of brains can be determined at a distance with modern data
management techniques, but actually getting specific information out of a
metahuman brain's gigantic pile of flashing instructions is time consuming and
intensive. Using this program, specific information is successfully retrieved
from the target's memory once the scan has been sustained on the target long
enough to be Permanent.

### Find Mind

* **Type:** B
* **Range:** S
* **Time:** CA
* **Duration:** S
* **Resistance Roll:** Firewall + Signal Defense

Disturbances in the packet flow can reveal the locations of certain kinds of
interference. One of the most often looked for is the presence of metahuman
brains. This technique is far more likely to work on a brain whose signal is not
being modulated by a connection to a network or by signal defense. This program
functions similarly to a Detection Spell in the information it can give.

### Pin Drop

* **Type:** B and D
* **Range:** Special (changes L)
* **Time:** CA
* **Duration:** S
* **Resistance Roll:** Signal Defense

Light moves towards infinity as fast as anything can, and so the theoretical
range at which a signal can be received is much longer than the practical range
at which it can be received. Hardware can make a big difference, but software
can also make a large difference by combing through what signal is available to
isolate individual voices. The user picks a known (though possibly out of range)
signal and makes their roll. For every 2 full Net Hits, the user can hear the
signal from the target as if the target's Signal strength were 1 higher. Only
the most successful Pin Drop effect applies, and all Pin Drops against a single
target expire the next time the target takes a Matrix Full Defense action.

### Probe

* **Type:** D
* **Range:** H (LOS)
* **Time:** CA
* **Duration:** P
* **Resistance Roll:** Signal Defense

Probing is a technique used to identify the weaknesses in a device or
connection. While active, the character's dicepools for programming used against
the target are increased by the net hits of the Probe. Only the most successful
Probe applies, and all Probes against a single target expire the next time the
target takes a Matrix Full Defense action.

### Reveal Contents

* **Type:** D
* **Range:** S (LOS)
* **Time:** CA
* **Duration:** P
* **Resistance Roll:** Firewall + Signal Defense (if any)

Data in data stores can be successfully inferred from the outside, given
sufficient probing. Information in the data stores will be copied out (though
not necessarily decrypted or defused) once the Reveal Contents has been
sustained long enough for it to become Permanent.

### Who Is

* **Type:** D
* **Range:** M
* **Time:** CA
* **Duration:** P

The Who Is protocols are an ancient and time honored method of finding the real
world location of an LTG (which is like a phone number or email address). While
somewhat time consuming, these techniques are quite powerful. This program uses
the target's Matrix Stealth value for the Threshold, and the location of the
target's transmitter will be found (accurate to within 1 meter) by the time the
Who Is becomes permanent.

## Attack Programs

Cybercombat usually is a short and brutal affair. As much as hackers like to
describe the dance of code and the clashing of packets, when it comes to ending
up on top, shooting first is a big step towards it.

Using an Attack Program involves rolling Logic + Cybercombat, using the target's
Firewall as a defense pool. A character may add their own Cybercombat skill to
their defense pool against programming with a range of C. Programming with a
range of S or H is affected as normal by Signal Defense. If an Attack Program is
soaked, a B program is soaked by Willpower and a D program is soaked by System.

### Black Hammer

**Type:** B **Range:** S (LOS) **Time:** CA

An improper neural impulse can digest a pancreas, terminate breathing, or stop a
heart, which is exactly what Black Hammer does. If a character is affected by
Black Hammer, she uses Willpower (Biofeedback Filter bonuses apply) to resist
physical damage equal to the Rating of the attack plus the net hits. Black
Hammer is incapable of doing damage beyond that which is necessary to completely
fill in the condition monitor. Any excess damage is lost (stoppage of internal
organ function is *bad*, but it's not "heads exploding" bad).

### Contagious RAS Override

**Type:** B **Range:** S **Time:** CA (S)

RAS Overrides are a normal part of the Matrix, but a clever Matrix user can
inflict them on others. The Logic + Cybercombat check is opposed by the target's
Firewall + Willpower + Signal Defense (if any). If net hits are achieved, the
subject is paralyzed as their motor neurons are edited out of functionality. All
physical actions are taken at a -6 penalty, and the victim must make a Willpower
(Net Hits) test to even attempt a physical action. The victim may attempt to end
this condition by taking a Toggle AR/VR action and making a Logic + Computer
test with a threshold of the net hits of Contagious RAS Override.

**Optimized Defense:** Internal SimRig or Reaction Enhancer.

### Crash

**Type:** D **Range:** C **Time:** SA

Spam and Viruses are a fact of life in the wireless world. But when you can see
nothing but, youâre probably in the process of being crashed. If an Icon is
affected by Crash, it uses Armor + System to resist Icon damage equal to the
rating of the attack plus any net hits. Program Icons have their hits reduced by
the net hits of the crash attack.

### Data Bomb

**Type:** D **Range:** C **Time:** CA (P)

A Data Bomb is a form of trap. If triggered, it releases malicious code and
destroys the contents it is wrapped around. A Data Bomb is "set" by wrapping it
around one or more files. Databombs are not easy to detect, requiring a Matrix
Perception test with a threshold equal to the number of hits achieved when
setting the databomb. If the file is directly accessed (to read or copy), the
bomb "explodes". This destroys the data (requiring a threshold of Recovery equal
to the number of hits initially scored creating the Data Bomb), and damaging the
Icon of whoever detonated the bomb (inflicting Icon Damage equal to program
rating). Data Bombs are normally bypassed with a passkey of some sort, but the
Data Bomb program can separately be Crashed, or the passkey can be Spoofed.
Failing to bypass a Data Bomb results in exactly the same effect as simply
accessing the data without noticing the bomb in the first place.

### Denial

**Type:** D **Range:** M **Time:** CA (S)

Denial is a river in Egypt. This is an attack which sends a large number of
nuisance requests for data to the target LTG through the Matrix. This results in
the target network being destabilized, or possibly even crashing altogether. The
Logic + Attack check is resisted with Firewall + Willpower, and every net hit
counts as an additional program that the target is sustaining. The target
network may remove effective sustained programs with an additional resistance
test whenever it takes a Matrix Defense action.

### Jingle

**Type:** B **Range:** C **Time:** CA

Jingle plants an idea into the target's mind, getting its name for its first
use: forcing people to remember advertising slogans. The Logic + Cybercombat
check is opposed by the target's Firewall + Willpower + Cybercombat (if any).
Net hits set the veracity with which the subject views the new fact.

### Seize

**Type:** B **Range:** S (LOS) **Time:** CA

It takes only 7 misfired neurons to create an epileptic event in a normal human.
A well-placed set of induction instructions can turn even the most physically
capable of metahumans into a convulsing mass of tissue. If a character is
affected by Seize, she may immediately resist the net hits of the attack with
Willpower (Biofeedback Filter bonuses apply). If there are any net hits
remaining, the character begins uncontrollably convulsing and is incapacitated.
Every (Rating) combat rounds, the victim may make another Willpower check to
attempt to reduce the remaining net hits of the attack. When the net hits are
reduced to zero, the character regains control of her body.

**Optimized Defense:** Move by Wire

## Communications Programs

*"The punishment was that one man could not understand the other. Can you
believe they used to consider that a punishment?"*

Using a Communications program requires a Logic + Electronic Warfare test.

### Cancel

**Type:** D **Range:** H **Time:** CA (S)

Information transfer is with waves as well as with particles, and when a wave
hits its opposite both are canceled and effectively cease to exist. With the
proper signals, the signals of a target can be neutralized. Every net hit on a
Logic + Electronic Warfare vs. Signal + Signal Defense test reduces the target's
dicepool on all broadcast Matrix actions by one. Cancel is a passive and very
subtle effect, not at all obvious until signals actually start to fail.

### Cloak

**Type:** D **Range:** C **Time:** CA (S)

With the right data manipulations a network can be hidden from casual or even in
depth observation in the Matrix. The user makes a Logic + Electronic Warfare
test and the target goes into Hidden Mode with the number of net hits
substituting for their Matrix Stealth check to stay hidden.

### ECCM

**Type:** D **Range:** C **Time:** CA (S)

Jamming can really put a cramp into the style of modern networking. But with the
expenditure of merely titanic computational resources on filtering out
interference and reiterating questionable data packets, the difficulties can be
mitigated. The user makes a Logic + Electronic Warfare test with a threshold
equal to half the Background that she is attempting to overcome. Each net hit
reduces the effective Background that the user has to deal with.

### Impersonate

**Type:** D **Range:** H **Time:** SA (S)

When two devices or networks have an active connection, a third party (that's
you) can use Impersonate to create a connection with one or the other system by
insinuating itself as the one of the participants. If successful, not only does
the user establish a connection, but the original connection is severed. The
Logic + Electronic Warfare test is opposed by Firewall + Signal Defense (if
any). The Signal Rating of the impersonated device is also added to the defense
pool, assuming that it is still functional.

**Optimized Defense:** If the impersonated device or network has a Signal that
is more than 1 higher than the attempting network's Signal, the target has an
optimized defense.

### Intercept

**Type:** D **Range:** L **Time:** SA (S)

Data traveling through the air can be recorded by anyone within range, and for
those of a cryptographic bent, that information can be used to figure out all
kinds of things. Obtaining the information from a conversation between two other
devices requires a Logic + Electronic Warfare test opposed by System + Signal
Defense (if any).

### Sensory Deprivation

**Type:** B **Range:** S (LOS) **Time:** CA (S)

The editing out of sensory information to a metahuman brain is an essential
portion of establishing VR, but it is also a potential weakness of any
metahuman. The Logic + Electronic Warfare check is opposed by the target's
Firewall + Willpower + Signal Defense (if any). If net hits are achieved, the
subject is blinded and completely cut off from physical senses as their sensory
neurons are suppressed. The victim may attempt to end this condition by taking a
Toggle AR/VR action and making a Logic + Computer test with a threshold of the
net hits of Sensory Deprivation.

**Optimized Defense:** Internal SimRig or multiple cybernetic senses.

## Exploit Programs

*"If algorithms that reverse engineer the production of supposedly one-way
mathematical transforms from finite comparisons between plaintexts and encrypted
formats are outlawed then only outlaws will have... that thing I just said."*

Using an Exploit program requires a Logic + Hacking test.

### Backdoor

**Type:** D **Range:** H **Time:** CA (P)

Backdoor creates a special trick that the user can activate as a Free Action
which creates a connection between the target and the user. The Logic + Hacking
test is opposed by Firewall + Signal Defense (if any).

### Decrypt

**Type:** D **Range:** L **Time:** Special (S)

Cryptology is a really complicated subject which is at the very heart of much of
computing. Within the context of Shadowrun, it is assumed that any time a
character gains access to the plaintext and encrypted version of a message that
the encryption key *can* be reverse engineered. In the case of asymmetric
encryption, any number of plaintexts can be created at will just by knowing the
public version. To decrypt, a user makes a Logic + Hacking test opposed by
Firewall looking to make a threshold of 2. The character only gets one chance
unless more plaintext/encryption pairs are obtained. If successful, the code is
broken in a single Complex Action. If sufficient hits are not achieved, the code
may yet still be broken, but it takes longer depending upon how many hits the
test was short of the threshold:

* 1 hour
* 1 day
* 1 month
* 1 year

### Jedi Trick

**Type:** D **Range:** S **Time:** CA

Jedi Trick bypasses a request for a password or show of credentials. The Logic +
Hacking test is opposed by Firewall + Signal Defense (if any).

**Step by Step: The Retina Scanner**

The simplest of retina scanners either keeps the list of retina possibilities on
site or off, and sends an unlock signal to the door when a match is made. The
Jedi Trick system bypasses those shenanigans altogether and directly opens the
door. More advanced Retina Scanners are embedded in a Faraday Cage and have a
direct wired connection to the door itself. This prevents a Jedi Trick and
requires characters to either submit a valid (possibly faked) retina for
scanning or to manually open the lock via Lockpicking or Harware skills.

### Master Control

**Type:** D **Range:** C **Time:** CA

Master Control is a method to ramp an account up in privileges. Just because a
data connection exists doesn't mean that the network on the other end actually
*trusts* data packets from that source. This program solves that by manually
altering the routing information for the user's connection, causing it to be
treated with greater privileges. The Logic + Hacking test is opposed by Firewall
+ Willpower + Cybercombat (if any).

### Misplace

**Type:** D **Range:** S **Time:** CA

Data is stored all kinds of crazy places, and successfully using Misplace causes
data to begin being stored in a place topologically similar to "the trashcan".
The Logic + Hacking test is opposed by Firewall + Signal Defense (if any).

### Ostraka

**Type:** D **Range:** S **Time:** CA

Ostraka causes a subscribed device or program to be apparently told to disengage
from the network. If it succeeds, the program shuts down or the device is
ejected from the network and becomes a lone device. The Logic + Hacking test is
opposed by Firewall + Willpower + Signal Defense (if any).

### Peristalsis

**Type:** B **Range:** S **Time:** SA (S)

The target's autonomic nervous system is activated remotely. This can be
embarrassing and socially awkward, but is usually not directly dangerous unless
they have an adrenal pump (which can be activated by this method). No matter
what the actual contents of the subject's intestines, the results can be
distracting and painful, causing a -2 penalty to all dicepools (this penalty
does not stack with further uses of this programming). The Logic + Hacking test
is opposed by Firewall + Willpower + Signal Defense (if any) + Biofeedback
Filter (if any).

**Optimized Defense:** Clean Digestion or Digestive Expansion

### Taxman

**Type:** B&D **Range:** H **Time:** CA

Taxman causes the user to become a seemingly legitimate data request. If
successful, the target system begins sending requested files to the Taxman. The
Logic + Hacking test is opposed by Firewall + Willpower + Signal Defense (if
any).

## Operations Programs

_"No one believes video evidence any more."_

Using an Operations Program requires a Logic + Computer test.

### Armor

**Type:** D **Range:** H **Time:** CA (S)

Armor Programming makes a system more resilient to Matrix damage. While it is
running, the target network rolls an extra number of dice to resist Icon Damage
equal to its rating. Only the best Armor program applies if more than one is
running.

### Fabrication

**Type:** D **Range:** C **Time:** CA (S)

Fabrication makes a seemingly meaningful datstream out of nothing at all. The
data can continue to be produced indefinitely in real time, with a quality
dictated by the results of a Logic + Computer test. This data can be tossed or
saved. Multiple copies of Fabrication can run on the same network or even
multiple networks in order to produce more data. For example, 6 hours of video
footage can be created from whole cloth in an hour and a half by having four
copies of Fabrication running for that period. If merely modifying existing
footage, one should just use Data Manipulation. Determining the fake would be
compared to the *worst* effort of the different Fabrications.

### Medic

**Type:** D **Range:** H (LOS) **Time:** CA (P)

Medic repairs Icon Damage equal to the number of hits gleaned from a Logic +
Computer test (maximum equal to Rating). Once the effects of Medic are
permanent, the programming can be run again for credit.

### Obscure

**Type:** D **Range:** C **Time:** CA (P)

Obscure makes a fact unfindable within a datastore. Overwriting it thousands of
times and redirecting links until the data is simply gone. Hits set the
threshold for future Recovery actions.

### Recover

**Type:** D **Range:** C **Time:** 1 minute (P)

Deleting information beyond the potential for recovery is a difficult
enterprise. Using Recover, data which has been destroyed can be reassembled into
something readable. If the action gets sufficient hits to recreate the lost
file, it becomes fully assembled once the program becomes permanent. Recover can
also be used to repair icon damage equal to hits, though it is not ideal for
this purpose.

### Redundant Biofeedback Filters

**Type:** D **Range:** C **Time:** CA (S)

Redundant Biofeedback Filters are something which is highly encouraged for users
experienced and newbie alike when navigating the dangerous world of the modern
Matrix. While it is running, the target network rolls an extra number of dice to
resist B attacks equal to its rating. Only the best Redundant Biofeedback Filter
program applies if more than one is running, but IT specialists will roll their
eyes at you if you aren't running at least one.

### Terminate Connection

**Type:** D **Range:** C **Time:** CA

Terminate Connection makes the user's network no longer connected to the target.
The range usually will then be Handshake unless the connection had originally
been made through a Matrix link. The user rolls Logic + Operations and is
opposed by the enemy network's System + Intuition. Success terminates the
connection and purges any Backdoor used to establish it in the first place.

## Decompiling Forms

Using a Decompiling Form requires a Resonance + Decompiling test.

### Can of Worms

**Type:** D **Range:** S (LOS) **Time:** CA **Fading:** 1/2R+2

This dread technique simultaneously assaults all networks in range except the
technomancer herself. She makes a Resonance + Decompiling check resisted by each
network's Firewall + Signal Defense. Those which are affected must soak Icon
Damage equal to Rating + net hits.

### Death Note

**Type:** B **Range:** S (LOS) **Time:** SA **Fading:** 1/2R

The song that ends a man is played. Man goto end. The technomancer makes a
Resonance + Decompiling check, and if it is not successfully resisted with the
target's Firewall + Signal Defense, the target must resist physical damage equal
to the rating plus net hits with Willpower.

### Lag

**Type:** D **Range:** C (LOS) **Time:** SA (S) **Fading:** 1/2R

The Technomancer overwhelms the processors of a network with irrelevancies.  The
technomancer makes a Resonance + Decompiling check, and if it is not
successfully resisted with the target's Firewall + Cybercombat the target's
Response is reduced by the net hits. A target whose Response hits zero simply
crashes as if its entire Icon Damage monitor was filled.

### Opening

**Type:** D **Range:** L **Time:** CA **Fading:** 1/2R+1

The resonance layer of mystery is removed from a transmission or file, leaving
nothing but unencrypted information.  The technomancer makes a Resonance +
Decompiling check, and if it is not successfully resisted with the encrypter's
Firewall + Willpower the file is decrypted. Yes, two systems running the same
EUE may find that their transmissions are differently difficult for a
technomancer to open. That's how Resonance rolls.

### Registry Dump

**Type:** D **Range:** S (LOS) **Time:** CA **Fading:** 1/2R+2

All running programming on all networks in range of the technomancer destabilize
and may get dumped outright. She makes a Resonance + Decompiling check resisted
by each network's Firewall + Signal Defense. Those which are affected have all
sustained programs have their number of activating hits reduced by the number of
net hits the technomancer achieves. Programs which are reduced to zero hits fade
from the matrix as if they had never been.

### Reset

**Type:** D **Range:** C (LOS) **Time:** CA **Fading:** 1/2R+3

The target network is reset backwards in time a number of rounds equal to the
net hits made against the target's Firewall + Willpower + Cybercombat. Alerts
triggered, data accumulated, and Icon Damage sustained during these rounds are
gone forever.

## Registering Forms

A Registering Form is used with Resonance + Registering.

### Restructure

**Type:** D **Range:** S **Time:** CA **Fading:** 1/2R+1

The Resonance shakes itself slightly, and at the end a device that had been part
of one network is now part of another. The technomancer's Resonance +
Registering test is compared against the Firewall + Willpower + Signal Defense
of both networks, and if it succeeds all involved parties display the device as
having always been a part of the new network.

### Test Pattern

**Type:** B&D **Range:** S (LOS) **Time:** CA **Fading:** 1/2R+1

An idea is placed into the Resonance and it holds the appearance of the
physically real. The technomancer defines some set of parameters which are then
recorded as valid by all sensory devices in the area of the technomancer's
Signal range, whether they are microphones or human eyes. The technomancer makes
a Resonance + Registering check. Any observers inside the range must make the
same number of hits on an Intuition + Response + Signal Defense or the
technomancer's defined parameters take precedence over "real" sense data.

### Transfigure

**Type:** B **Range:** S (LOS) **Time:** 1 hour (P) **Fading:** 1/2R+2

New data is implanted directly into the values, knowledge, and social mores of
the target.  The target resists the effects with Willpower, but being attached
to a network with the biofeedback filtration active can undo this kind of
conditioning rather easily. The effects do not take hold until it becomes
permanent, and every round a Firewall is engaged it can make an attempt to
prevent it by succeeding in a Firewall + Biofeedback Filter (net hits).

### Validation

**Type:** D **Range:** S (LOS) **Time:** CA **Fading:** 1/2R

If the form is successful, any number of new valid passcodes are added to a
device or network. This is resisted with Firewall + Willpower + Signal Defense.

## Background Programs

A background program is capable of running on a single device and does not need
to run on the entire network nor does it particularly benefit from doing so.
This means that a background program does not count as a program running on any
network. Most of them don't even need rules, because they don't come into direct
conflict with other programs. Here are some examples that your characters might
have running:

* **Virtual Pet:** Virtual Pet puts an Arrow of some kind of animal into the
  user's perception. Depending upon the firewall settings of others, it may be
  perceived by other users as well. Virtual Pets run the gamut of quality from
  simple Nintendogs to complex icons that can virtually pass a cat-equivalence
  Turing test. Virtual Pets are available as real animals, fantastic beasts, and
  even humanoids (while the DreamDate software is sold to a different audience
  than most Virtual Pet consumers, it uses much the same technology).
* **Miracle Shooter:** Capture the flag, team death match, king of the hill, all
  your favorite shooter game options.

## Pilot Programs

A pilot program is an autosoft of some kind. It is entirely capable of running
on an isolated device. It does not count as a Sustained program, but it is
rating limited by the Pilot rating of the Device.

### Clearsight

Clearsight is used to identify things that the Sensors detect. It is specific to
a single sensor suite, and it is used for identifying targets (Pilot +
Clearsight) and interpretation of sensory inputs (Sensors + Clearsight).

### Fabricate

Fabricate is used to create a specific thing with a specific device. The rating
acts as an appropriate Artisan or Hardware skill, and the overall dicepool is
Pilot + Fabricate.

### Maneuver

Maneuver allows a specific device to navigate in real space, acting as a
piloting skill *and* as a Defense dicepool. Drones that pilot themselves roll
Pilot + Maneuver while moving and have a Defense pool equal to their Maneuver
rating.

### Targeting

Targeting is used to shoot things in the face. It is weapon specific. Other
modifiers for ranged combat still apply (most notably, the smartlink bonus is
cumulative with the Pilot + Targeting dicepool).

### Some of the Autosofts got removed

The basic book talks about an "Electronic Warfare" autosoft, which literally
duplicates having an entire actual metahuman brain dedicated to signal defense
and jamming. That's totally not acceptable, so that autosoft no longer exists.
Also it has a separate Maneuver and Defense autosoft, which is unnecessary in
these rules.
