# It Works like Magic: Skills of the Matrix

Using any Programming or Complex Form is game mechanically much like casting a
spell. Programs and Complex Forms are divided into categories as spells are, and
the character's dicepool is determined by the program category. Using something
from the category of Attack uses Cybercombat + Logic in the same manner as
casting a Combat Spell would use Spellcasting + Magic. Using Operations Programs
uses the Computer skill, using Analysis Programs uses the Data Search skill,
using Exploit Programs uses the Hacking skill, and using Communications Programs
uses the Electronic Warfare skill. Technomancers have access to Complex Forms
which mimic Programs and use the same dicepools, but they also have special
Complex Forms for which no software equivalent exists, these use the Resonance
skills of Compiling, Decompiling, and Registering.

## Computer

The Computer skill governs the navigation of baroque menus, the interactions
with strange interfaces, and other 21st century activities which allow users to
get devices to do the things that they are supposed to do.

### Command

From toasters to automated factories, every device capable of acting under its
own preprogrammed instructions must be at some point set in motion by a user.
Letting loose the Rube Goldberg apparatus which will lead inevitably to the
desired result requires a Logic + Computer check. Simple instruction sets ("heat
bread until deliciously browned", or "follow grid-guide directions to MÅ¯stek")
require only a single hit. Complicated instruction sets capable of responding
appropriately to impediments require more hits. Whenever a drone is confronted
with the bizarre, use the number of hits on its last command check as a
threshold to determine if it is thrown off.

### Data Manipulation

Deleting files, creating bogus data, and otherwise covering up information is
quite an involved set of procedures in 2071. Between the existence of extensive
and often distributed back-up systems and the all-pervasive reality of
contradictory information and veracity checking, actually covering one's tracks
in the Matrix is as much art as science. Whether eradicating viable video of a
break-in or keeping one's Matrix activities away from the notice of the popos,
one makes an Intuition + Computer check. As always, more hits are better.
Glitches indicate that one's manipulation actually raised flags and made the
information *more* noticeable to Interpol and other interested parties.

### Operations

Operations Programs are activated with Logic + Computer, and Operations Complex
Forms are activated with Resonance + Computer.

### Computer Specializations

* Command
* Data Manipulation
* Operations

## Cybercombat

Brutally simple, the Cybercombat skill is used to fight in the Matrix, where
normal combat methods are useless. While hackers like to speak about the complex
dance of packets and draw comparisons to World War I dog fighting or fencing or
whatever other metaphor, the cold reality is that, once a Connection is
established, Matrix combat is often a pretty short affair.

### Attack

Attack Programs are activated with Logic + Cybercombat, and Attack Complex
Forms are activated with Resonance + Cybercombat.

### Defense

When a connection is established between two icons, signal defense is
essentially useless. A character's Signal Defense does not apply against attacks
made at Connection Range, regardless of who the target is. A character may use
her own Cybercombat to defend herself from attacks made at Connection Range.

### Cybercombat Specializations

* Attack
* Defense

## Data Search

This is the character's research ability, their ability to find information
online, and perhaps most importantly of all it is the character's ability to
notice icons and events in the Matrix world.

### Analysis

Analysis Programs are activated with Logic + Data Search, and Analysis Complex
Forms are activated with Resonance + Data Search.

### Matrix Perception

Just as characters can fail to notice things in the physical world or the astral
plane, the Matrix is full of things which may or may not be noticed against the
background cacophony of data transfer which surrounds everyone. An Intuition +
Data Search is used to notice hidden icons and data stores in precisely the same
way as Perception or Assensing opposes Infiltration checks. Also, like
Assensing, an Intuition + Data Search check can elicit more information about an
individual Icon. Having cybernetic senses allows Matrix information to be more
easily assimilated into the user's experience, making them better at Matrix
perception. Any of the following cybernetics: Display Link, Sound Link, Taste
Booster, Olfactory Booster, Touch Link all grant a +1 dicepool bonus to Matrix
Perception tests, with a maximum bonus of +3. The implanted Sim Rig provides
multisensory SimSense to the body and provides the maximum +3 bonus all by
itself. Technomancers, Sprites, AIs, and other matrix natives always get the +3
bonus without need of special equipment.

<!--
| Net hits | Information Gained |
|:--------:|:-------------------|
| 0 | You are aware of the Icon's presence, and can tell if it's a Program or Network. |
| 1 | <ul><li>The general health of the Network (undamaged, damaged, crashed, etc) including how many programs it's sustaining.</li><li>The number of hits sustaining each Program you can see.</li><li>Whether the Network is Occupied or Empty (Technomancers/Sprites/AIs are non-biological but <em>do</em> count as Occupied).</li><li>If you are a Technomancer looking at another Technomancer, you can tell if they follow the Resonance or the Dissonance.</li></ul> |
| 2 | <ul><li>The general class of the Icon, eg: Metahuman PAN, Flirt Sprite, Operations program, and so on.</li><li>How many active Connections a Network has.</li><li>If the Icon is a Network that incorpoates other devices, gives the general category of each device (cyberware, sensor, gun, credstick, etc).</li><li>Whether the Network's Firewall has an IC program running.</li></ul> |
| 3 | <ul><li>You can tell if the Matrix stats (Signal, Response, Firewall, and System) of the Network are higher than, equal to, or lower than your own.</li><li>The exact Program that an Icon reprisents.</li><li>The LTG of a Network or device.</li></ul> |
| 4 | <ul><li>The exact Matrix stats of the Icon.</li><li>The Signal range that each of the Network's connections is traveling across.</li></ul> |
-->

### Research

There is an incredibly large amount of information available on the Matrix. And
while much of it is hidden away in secret data stores which are available only
to those with the proper authorization or funding, the wealth of information
available in blogs, wikipedia entries, and fan sites is staggering. Much of what
is available is wrong, whether placed as deliberately unhelpful information to
reduce the seeming veracity of real truth, or simply the mad ravings of
conspiracy enthusiasts. But for the savvy, the nuggets of truth can be sifted
from the silt of falsity and much can be discerned. Researching requires no
special programming on the part of an individual user, just an active Matrix
connection and a few seconds to sort through the universe of data. Researching
topics is not an extended test, because that's boring to resolve. If a character
wishes to research the answer to a question, one simply makes a Logic + Data
Search test:

**Hits Required / Information you are looking for:**

1. Public Record (Dates, National population figures, Laws, Street Maps)
2. Contentious Information (Genocides, Religious Opinions, Political Theory)
3. Technical (Exacting Schema of Buildings)
4. Obscure (Old Secrets)
5. Very Obscure (New Secrets, Unpopular Media from before the Crash)
6. Earthdawn Metaplot Connections (Horrors, Immortals, Magic Cycles)

Successfully getting the requisite number of hits turns up an answer to a
question in a few minutes. Succeeding by one extra hit gets the info in a few
rounds, and succeeding at the test by two or more hits turns up the information
immediately (just one initiative pass). No, you can't retry, all the different
search parameters you are trying is factored into the initial test for
everyone's sanity. Glitching on the test involves information which is
hilariously or tragically wrong as you might expect. If people are actively
attempting to hide information on the Matrix by using misinformation to attack
the perceived veracity of the truth (the only real way to hide things once
they've hit the Matrix somewhere), the difficulties increase by 1 to 4 depending
upon how good they are at it. So, for example, the Horror Cycle is merely
contentious information, but some people have gone to great lengths to hide this
data increasing the threshold all the way to 6.

### Data Search Specializations

* Analysis
* Matrix Perception
* Research

## Electronic Warfare

The Electronic Warfare skill is used to disrupt and prevent the disruption of
signals and communications in a variety of ways.

### Communications

Communications Programs are activated with Logic + Electronic Warfare, and
Communications Complex Forms are activated with Resonance + Electronic Warfare.

### Jamming

Jamming can be used in two ways. One can perform a targeted jamming operation,
or one can area jam. Jamming a specific target can be done with any Commlink,
while jamming an area usually involves the use of an Area Jammer (see SR4, p.
320). A targeted jam attempts to remove a specific signal or close a specific
connection. The character must have sufficient high density signal to reach both
ends of the communication one is attempting to disrupt. It is a complex action
to jam out that signal, and the character must succeed at a Logic + Electronic
Warfare test resisted by the highest Logic + Electronic Warfare dicepool of
someone on either end of the communique who wants to keep the channel open.

Area Jamming is much like magical background count. It reduces the effective
signal of all Matrix users except Resonance users by its rating. Technomancers
and Sprites in a jammed area instead have their Resonance or Rating reduced by
the jamming level. Technomancers whose Resonance is reduced to zero cannot use
any Complex Forms. Sprites whose Rating falls to zero are destroyed. An area
jammer generates a rating of jamming equal to the hits on a Logic + Electronic
Warfare + Jammer Rating test and lasts as long as the batteries do. The basic
area jammer in the basic book has an effective Signal of only 1. And no, you
can't just patch it through your Commlink to get the same effect over a larger
area. Military jammers have higher Signal values, but note that simply owning a
jammer of Signal 4 is enough to have the Corporate Court consider you a
potential threat to world trade.

### Sensors

Machines collect, sort, and discard data continuously every second of the day
and night. Actually getting a useful picture of what's going on through Sensors
is a skill. That skill is Electronic Warfare, and the dicepool is Intuition +
Electronic Warfare + Sensor Rating. Remember of course that, unlike a human, one
can't assume that any particular sensor suite has five senses, and that many
events may be undetectable regardless of many dice one is rolling on an EW based
perception test. This is only for when receiving sensor abstracts, if one is
actually personally viewing the sense data either as windowed Arrows or fully
immersive VR, then the character makes regular Perception tests instead.

### Signal Defense

A skilled electronic warrior can defend herself and others against programs
running in the Matrix. To provide signal defense, she must have LOS to all the
targets being defended, she must be be presently active in the Matrix, and she
must declare which systems she is protecting as a free action. Signal Defense
provides a number of extra resistance dice equal to the character's Electronic
Warfare skill. If more than one Matrix user is providing Signal Defense on the
same target, use the teamwork rules.

A character who is actively providing signal defense can do so even against
programs she is not aware of. The act of signal modulation and source
obfuscation makes such attacks more difficult whether the hacker knows that
there's someone on the other end or not. Signal Defense normally requires a
network with a generic Firewall. Sprites cannot provide Signal Defense unless
they have the Signal Management power. Technomancers can provide Signal Defense
normally.

### Electronic Warfare Specializations

* Communications
* Jamming
* Sensors
* Signal Defense

## Hacking

Hacking is at the core a skill dedicated to creating commands and data which are
treated as legitimate despite the fact that they are not.

### Exploit

Exploit Programs are activated with Logic + Hacking, and Exploit Complex Forms
are activated with Resonance + Hacking.

It is important to note that the "Backdoor" program is an Exploit Program, which
is the most important method that a non-technomancer has to create a connection
with an uncooperative network.

### Forge Credentials

People can do crazy crap on the Matrix and have that be "okay". At least, if
they have the appropriate credentials. Heck, if you're a NeoNET security spider
it is considered okay by the Corporate Court for you to use deadly force on
other Matrix users. With a Complex Action and a Logic + Hacking test you can
forge credentials allowing you to do *anything you want*. The number of hits
sets the apparent veracity of your licenses. These licenses do not hold up to
any deep analysis, and of course an actual security spider doesn't really care
if you seemingly have authorization from Interpol to delete his Cortex.Net. But
that kind of behavior can be quite helpful in delaying IC. It's worth a shot
anyway.

Sprites cannot take the Forge Credentials action, but see below about
Datamasking.

### Matrix Stealth

Normally, everything in the Matrix is quite visible (or at least potentially
visible to people who are looking for it). However, there is a *lot* of data,
and while you can't make your presence in the Matrix undetectable, you can make
it rather a chore to locate you. This is a process that involves spoofing your
access ID as a standard software updating routine, running your connection
through dozens of intervening nodes and embedding your key data in holograms of
adorable kittens with inspirational messages about increasing productivity. Or
something. It's not game mechanically important what exactly it is that you are
doing to not get noticed. It's not important whether you are attempting to not
get seen or trying to get seen as something that is summarily ignored. In either
case you simply roll Intuition + Hacking, and targets who don't get comparable
hits on Matrix Perception tests don't notice you. And yes, letting loose with a
Black Hammer barrage *does* give you away. Program actions that are obvious will
show onlookers that you exist and their reality filters will automatically make
you stand out, so once you push things into matrix combat territory you
seriously might as well just have your icon be something awesome looking.

Sprites cannot take the Matrix Stealth action. Some Sprites have the Datamasking
power, which is a similar ability to create a disguise that can be defeated with
Matrix Perception (though the dicepool is different). Sprites without the
Datamasking power are always visible as their true nature.

### Hacking Specializations

* Exploit
* Forge Credentials
* Matrix Stealth

# Resonance Skills

Distinct from other Matrix skills because they are based on Resonance rather
than Logic, these skills are only available to those who have a Resonance
attribute in the first place (Technomancers, Sprites, and some AIs).

Technomancers are justifiably feared by many. Not because they control machines
directly with their minds (indeed, that sort of behavior has been standard
practice in 2071 for longer than a majority of the world's population has been
alive); but because they are seemingly able to bypass the laws of causality that
the Matrix lives by. Technomancers and hackers alike are able to induce data
transformations in systems which are not contiguous to themselves. But
technomancers potentially are directly connected to all the devices around them.
Even the devices that can only make connections through cables. That disturbs
people, because people in 2071 are acutely aware of the fact that they
themselves are devices, and that they are treated as such by the corporations
for whom they toil. Being confronted with the implications of being literally
nail shaped is discomforting in the presence of a man with a hammer for a brain.

## Compiling

This skill is used to create Sprites and to determine how many tasks they owe you.

### Compile Sprite

A technomancer who wishes to create a sprite must first choose one of the five
types of sprites available to her personal stream and select a desired rating.
For every three whole Rating points the sprite has, the technomancer may select
one additional optional power for the sprite to have. The technomancer then
makes an opposed test using her Resonance + Compiling against the proposed
rating of the sprite. If at least one net hit is achieved, the sprite takes form
and owes the character a number of tasks equal to the net hits. If a glitch is
achieved on the compiling test, the sprite takes form and owes the character
nothing.

Compiling a sprite, whether successfully or not, causes fading equal to half the
Rating of the sprite plus the number of hits scored against the technomancer. If
the rating of the sprite exceeds the character's Resonance, that fading is
physical rather than stun damage.

### Compiling Forms

A technomancer who knows a Compiling Form uses their Resonance + Compiling to
set their dicepool while using it.

### Threading

A technomancer can hack on the fly, but if she wishes to use Resonance Forms,
she uses an Intuition + Compiling test rather than Software as her test to do
so. This is called threading. Decompiling and Registering forms cannot be
threaded.

### Compiling Specializations

* By Sprite Type

## Decompiling

The decompiling skill is used to unravel Matrix icons, or more importantly still
the instruction sets which govern them. More than simply deleting data (a tricky
business in the highly redundant and incestuous computing world of 2071),
Decompiling calls upon the Deep Resonance to remove data altogether, as if that
data had simply never existed in the first place.

### Decompiling Forms

A technomancer who knows a Decompiling Form uses their Resonance + Decompiling
to set their dicepool while using it.

### Remove Tasks

A technomancer can attempt to remove the tasks owed by a Sprite with a Complex
Action. The technomancer makes an opposed test using her Resonance + Decompiling
against the Sprite's rating. If the sprite is Registered the sprite uses its
Rating + the Resonance of the associated technomancer instead. Every net hit
reduces the owed tasks by one. If the owed tasks reach zero, it will immediately
cease whatever activities it was engaged in and become inert for one entire
combat round during which the technomancer can attempt to take control of it. If
she does not do so, the sprite disintegrates into random and unintelligible bits
and bytes on its next action. Removing tasks causes Fading. The technomancer
must resist fading equal to half the sprite's rating + the number of total hits
it achieved.

### Rend Icon

A technomancer can simply attack enemy icons with the Decompiling skill. This
attack takes a Simple Action, and uses Resonance + Decompiling as a dicepool.
The target's defense pool is their Firewall + Cybercombat (if any). The attack
inflicts Matrix damage with a DV of the technomancer's Charisma + net hits. The
damage is soaked with System. Rending an icon causes no fading, and icons
crashed in this manner leave no record in the Matrix or their own internal logs
of having crashed. This attack has a range of Connection.

### Unravel Commands

Any device operating on its own does so under the auspices of a set of commands.
A Technomancer can unravel those command structures directly. By taking an
Unraveling action, the technomancer reduces the effective number of hits on the
initial Command test by her number of hits on a Resonance + Decompiling test. A
device whose list instruction set has been reduced to zero hits or less simply
goes inactive. Devices with multiple instruction sets have all instructions
reduced equally. Like most Resonance actions, unraveling commands causes fading.
The technomancer resists fading equal to the number of hits on the highest
original instruction set of the device. This action has a range of Connection.

### Decompiling Specializations

* Unraveling
* Task Removal
* Rending
* Decompiling Forms

## Registering

The Registering skill is used similarly to Binding, to register sprites to
perform long term task contracts.

### Register Sprite

A technomancer can take her unbound sprite to one of her Resonance Nodes with a
Rating at least equal to the sprite's rating for a number of hours equal to the
sprite's rating for some sort of crazy technomantic special one-on-one chat
session. This registering session does not count against the sprite's allotted 8
hours of existence. Once complete, the technomancer makes a Resonance +
Registering test opposed by twice the sprite's Rating. If the technomancer gets
net hits, the sprite becomes registered and those net hits are added to the
Tasks owed. Fading is equal to half the sprite's rating plus the total number of
hits the sprite achieved.

If the technomancer glitches her test, passes out from fading, or watches a
critical success coming off the opposed roll, the sprite breaks free. This is
bad. Little arcs of electricity play across open cabling, things catch fire,
monitors play only static.

### Registering Forms

A technomancer who knows a Registering Form uses their Resonance + Registering
to set their dicepool.

### Reregistering

A technomancer can repeat the registration process for credit with any of her
registered sprites. Services gained in this way stack, and a sprite already
registered has no chance of going berserk should the processing go disastrously
bad. As there are no monetary costs to registering sprites, a technomancer is
limited in her sprite army "only" by time, fading considerations, and her hard
cap of not being allowed more registered sprites than her Charisma at any time.

### Registering Specializations

* By Sprite Type
