
# Introduction

*The Ends of the Matrix* is a set of full replacement rules for the Matrix of
Shadowrun 4e. That means that these rules are intended to be used instead of the
*Wireless World* chapter (SR4, pgs. 206 - 240) and instead of the *Unwired* book
(all pages). It is not a full replacement of the Shadowrun world story, so books
like *Emergence* and *System Failure* stand on their own. This piece is
admittedly quite long, but when you factor the number of pages of material that
it replaces, it's not that bad.

This work is different in tone from other Shadowrun books, because the flavor
text is not written "in character". This book is written with a voice directed
at the players of the game, and with good reason. The matrix is an integral part
of the lives of every character in the game world from birth, and it really
isn't reasonable to expect to find material that the characters would consent to
read that wouldn't make assumptions about basic levels of matrix familiarity
that the players doubtlessly do not have (not living in that world). While
astral space is something that a majority of characters in the 2070s have never
experienced, matrix interaction really isn't. In addition, this is a set of
optional replacement rules, so the author has chosen to break the 4th wall
constantly in an effort to show the reader both how the system works and why it
works that way instead of some other way. After all, the Matrix subsystem has
undergone an almost complete overwrite upwards of 9 times already (SR1, Virtual
Realities, SR2, VR 2.0, SR3, Matrix 3, Target: Matrix, SR4, Unwired), so it
seems clear that the number of ways that the Matrix can be conceived of and
modeled in-game is tremendously large. Justifying the model here is probably
necessary.

The question is raised however of "why do this at all?", and the answer is
because I honestly am not happy with the Matrix rules as they stand, and do not
believe that they hold up to careful observation. The first insult thrown at
anyone who complains about rules (or any intellectual property) is along the
lines of "If you don't like it, why don't you make something better?" Well,
hopefully I have. And while I lack access to a large playtesting crew, I don't
think there are presently any giant holes in this rule set. If there are, then
that will be a shame, and I will humbly accept my plate of delicious crow.

So what precisely is wrong with the Matrix rules in SR4 such that they need to
be completely rewritten from the ground up? Again, for the 10th time? Simply:
the Matrix rules in SR4 do not hold up when people attempt to push them or
exploit them. Even authors of Unwired have described it as "Six parts Hollywood
hackers, six parts modern tech, zero parts playtesting by a powermunchkin", and
that's a shame. Fundamentally, I believe that the matrix rules need to be more
solid than do the rules of other subsystems. Unlike magic or car driving or
whatever, the Matrix is predicated on the idea of the acting characters actually
knowing the rules and deliberately attempting to exploit holes in them. Hacking
is about finding power exploits, so if power exploits exist in the rules it is
actually counter-immersive for characters in the world to not use them.

So the basic SR4 rules contain the exploits of

* **Script Kiddy**: where you can wave your credstick around instead of actually
  having any skill to hack effectively.
* **Hackastack**: where you can benefit from having multiple iterations of
  hardware to bypass structural limits of personal identity.
* **Drop-Out**: where you can choose to segregate yourself from the matrix and
  still hack effectively, despite being unhackable in return.
* **Agent Smith**: where you can gain extra actual actions from your pocket
  book.

The net result is that characters with no technical skills at all can throw some
money on the table and hack as if they were dozens or hundreds of hackers at no
actual risk to themselves or anything they care about. That's bad, because the
entire concept of a hacker entails the fact that if they could do that then they
would. It is the hope that these presented rules will not have problems like
that, or that if they do that at the very least they will not produce a such
perfect storm which relegates the concept of the Matrix Specialist to the
dustbin of history.

## Versioning

This document is based on [The 4.01
Version](http://tgdmb.com/viewtopic.php?t=48836), but it has been modified since
then. Changes to formatting, or even small changes that fix minor logic errors
(such as Machine Sprites getting a Clearsight Complex Form instead of the
Perception Skill they should have) are not particularly marked out. However,
there are a few spots where the 4.01 version simply doesn't cover some case that
has since come up in play. For those things, I've written in new rules that work
with the rest of the ruleset. Those entirely new rules are marked as "Bonus
Rule", so that you know that I've made something up. If the Bonus Rules are dumb
you can blame me and my gaming groups, not Frank.

-Lokathor
